# Adjektiv

Alla adjektiv har ändelsen *__-a__*,

- *bel__a__* – snygg, vacker
- *grand__a__ tablo* – stort bord
- *bon__a__* lernanto* – bra elev

Även adjektiv kan få flertalsändelsen -j:

- *granda__j__ tabloj* – stora bord
- *bona__j__* lernantoj* – bra elev
- *mia__j__ fratinoj* – mina systrar
- via__j__ juna__j__ amikoj – dina unga vänner

# N

Esperanto nouns have two cases, nominative and accusative. The accusative is used to show the object of a transitive verb (the person or thing affected by the action of the verb).

- *Kiu__n__ mi vidas?* – Who__m__ do I see?
- *Mi vidas amiko__n__* – I see a friend.

Do not use the accusative after the verb "to be" or its equivalents.

Adjectives agree with the nouns they qualify: they take the same *__-j__* and *__-n__* endings.

- *Vi estas bon__a__ amik__o__* – You're a good friend.
- *Vi estas bon__aj__ amik__oj__* – You're good friends.
- *Vi havas bon__an__ amik__on__* – You have a good friend.
- *Vi havas bon__ajn__ amik__ojn__* – You have good friends.

Esperanto expresses other case relationships through the use of prepositions. The English possesive is rendered by *__de__*:

- *La libroj __de__ mia frato.* – My brother's books.

# Conjugation 

## Base form: *-i*
  
- *labor__i__*          – to work

## Present tense: *-as*

- *mi labor__as__*      – I work
- *vi labor__as__*      – You work
- *li/ŝi labor__as__*   – He/she works
- *ni labor__as__*      – We work 
- *ili labor__as__*     – They work

## Past tense: *-is*

- *mi labor__is__*      – I worked.
- *vi labor__is__*      – You worked.
- *li/ŝi labor__is__*   – He/she worked.
- *ni labor__is__*      – We worked.
- *ili labor__is__*     – They worked.

## Future tense: *-os*

- *mi labor__os__*      – I will work.
- *vi labor__os__*      – You will work.
- *li/ŝi labor__os__*   – He/she will work.
- *ni labor__os__*      – We will work.
- *ili labor__os__*     – They will work.

# The conjuction *ke*

is used to introduce a noun clause. Unlike its English equivalent "that"

1. it cannot be omitted, and
2. it is usually preceded by a comma.

Examples:

- *Vi vidas __ke__ mi manĝas.* – You see that I'm eating.
- *Li diras __ke__ li iros.* – He says he'll go.

# The prefix *mal-*

changes the meaning of a word to its opposite.

- *bona* – good
  - *__mal__bona* – bad
- *granda* – big, great
  - *__mal__granda* – little, small
- *bela* – beautiful
  - *__mal__bela* – ugly

# The prefix *ge-*

denotes both sexes together:

- *__ge__fratoj* – brothers and sisters
- *__ge__patroj* – parents

# Polite expressions

- *__bonvolu__* – please, be so good as to
- *__dankon__* – thank you
- *__saluton__* – hello, hi

# Word order

The usual order of words in the sentence is subject-verb-object, as in English. However, since the accusative ending *-n* pn the object makes it clear which is the subject and which the object, word order can be varied for stylistic or pragmatic purposes, very much more readily in Esperanto than in English.

- *Mi legas libron.* – I'm reading a book.
- *Libron mi legas.* – (A book is what I'm reading.)

# *Kio, Kion*

*Kio* means "what", as subject of the sentence:

- *__Kio__ estas tio?* – What's that?
- *__Kio__ estas sur la tablo?* – What is on the table?

Where "what" is the object of the verb, the Esperanto equivalent is *Kion*:

- *__Kion__ vi faras?* – What are you doing?
- *__Kion__ ŝi diris?* – What did she say?

