# Numerals

De grundläggande räkneorden hittar du i ordlistan till denna lektion. Lär in dem noggrant. Sedan kan du kombinera dem till vilka tal som helst mellan 1 och 999999. 

- 11 dek unu
- 12 dek du
- 20 dudek
- 25 dudek kvin
- 49 kavrdek naux
- 111 cent dek unu
- 456 kvarcent kvindek ses
- 9999 naux mil nauxcent nauxdek naux
- 153837 cent kvindek tri mil okcent tridek sep
- 

- Addition:      8 + 3 = 11 – *ok plus tri estas dek-unu*
- Subtraction:   15 - 6 = 9 – *dek-kvin minus ses estas naŭ*

# Accusative of Motion Towards

Esperanto prepositions are normally followed by the nominative case:

- *post mi* – after me
- *sen ŝi* – without her
- *en domo* – in a house

However, prepositions describing place may be followed by an accusative to show motion toward, e.g.

- *Mi iras en la domo__n__.* – I am going into the house.
- (Compare: *Ili manĝas en la domo.* – They are eating in the house.)

Another example:

- *La kato saltis sur la tablo__n__.* – The cat jumped onto the table.
- *La kato saltis sur la tablo.* – The cat jumped around on the table.

# The pronoun *oni*

The indefinite pronoun *oni* means

- people (in general
- they
- you.

Examples:

- *__Oni__ manĝas.* – People are eating.
- *__Oni__ sidas.* – People are sitting.
 

# Th reflexive pronoun *si*

The pronoun *si* (accusative *sin) refers back to the subject of the clause:

- himself
- herself
- itself
- themselves
- oneself

Examples:

- *Li lavas __sin__.* – He washes himself.
- *Ŝi rigardas __sin__.* – She looks at herself.
- *Ili kantas al __si__.* – They are singing to themselves.
 
*si* is used only in referring to a third-person subject. It is never itself the subject of a sentence. Compare:

- *Mi rigardas min.* – I look at myself.
- *Ili rigardas sin.* – They look at themselves.

# The prefix *re-*

Like English "re-", it can mean either

- "again, a second time"
- or "back".

Examples:

- *__re__vidi* – to see again
- *__re__doni* – to give back 
- *__re__meti* – to put back, to replace

 
