# Әліпби

The Esperanto alphabet consists of 28 letters: a, b, c, ĉ, d, e, f, g, ĝ, h, ĥ, i, j, ĵ, k, l, m, n, o, p, r, s, ŝ, t, u, ŭ, v, z.

Note the following differences from English:

- **a** as in "father"
- **c** = ts as in "Betsy"
- **ĉ** = ch as in "church"
- **e** as in "there"
- **g** as in "give"
- **ĝ** as in "judge"
- **h** as in "hammer"
- **ĥ** = Scottish ch as in "Loch"
- **i** as in "machine"
- **j** = y as in "yes". **aj**, **ej**, **oj**, **uj** are diphtongs consisting respectivel of a, e, o, u plus a short i-sound. Thus
  - **aj** = i in "die"
  - **ej** = a in "face"
  - **oj** = oy in "boy"
  - **uj** = ui in "ruin", prnounced quickly.
- **ĵ** = zh as in "measure"
- **o** as in "north"
- **r** is always pronounced – ideally, rolled
- **s** as in "sense"
- **ŝ** = sh in "sharp"
- **u** as in "fool"
- **ŭ** = w as in "tower". **aŭ**, **eŭ** are diphtongs consisting respectively of "a" or "e" plus a short oo-sound. Thus
  - aŭ = ou in "mouth"
  - eŭ is as "eh-oo".

# Pronunciation

Words are pronounced exactly as spelled, applying the equivalents mentioned above, e.g.

- *amiko* = ah-MEE-koh
- *ĉambro* = CHAHM-broh
- *ĝi* = jee.

# Stress

Words of more than one syllable are stressed on the last syllable but one, e.g.

- *te-le-FO-no* (teh-leh-FOH-noh)
- *ra-DI-o* (rah-DEE-oh)
- *kaj* (kigh)
- a-MI-ko (ah-MEE-koh)
- ES-tas (ESS-tahss).
- NB: AN-kaŭ (because kaŭ is a single syllable).

Be careful over words like historio (hi-sto-RI-o, hee-stoh-REE-oh).

# Article

The definite article is *la* (– \*the). It is invariable (no change for gender, case or number). There is no indefinite article:

- *la amiko* – the friend
  - *amiko* – a friend
- *la laboro* – the work
  - *laboro* – work

# Personal Pronouns

- *mi* – I
- *vi* – you
- *li* – he
- *ŝi* – she
- *ĝi* – it
- *ni* – we
- *ili* – they

The pronouns *li, ŝi, ĝi* are used in just the same way as English "he, she, it".

# Possessive Pronouns

These are formed by adding the ending **a** to the simple pronouns:

- *mia* – my
- *via* – your
- *lia* – his
- *ŝia* – her
- *ĝia* – its
- *nia* – our
- *ilia* – their

# Nouns

All nouns end in -O. There is no grammatical gender: where appropriate, feminine sex is indicated by a suffix.

- _tabl**o**_ – table
- _lernant**o**_ – learner
- _lernant**in**o_ – learner (female)

# Plural

The plural ending is **j**. Both nouns and adjectives take this ending, e.g.:

- _tablo**j**_ – tables
- _lernanto**j**_ – learners
- _via**j** lernanto**j**_ – your learners

# Verbs

1. The infinitive ending is **-i**, e.g.
   - _lern**i**_ – to learn
   - _labor**i**_ – to work
   - _est**i**_ – to be.
2. The present tense ending is **-as**. It is the same for all persons and numbers:
   - _mi sid**as**_ – I sit
   - _vi sid**as**_ – you sit
   - _ni sid**as**_ – we sit
   - _ili sid**as**_ – they sit.

# *Ĉu?*

This is an interrogative particle, used to turn a statement into a yes/no question:

- _**Ĉu** vi sidas?_ – Are you sitting?
- _**Ĉu** vi skribas?_ – Are you writing? Do you write?

# *Kiu?*

This interrogative functions both as a pronoun ("who?") and as an adjective ("which?"), e.g.

- _**Kiu** vi estas?_ – Who are you?
- _**Kiu** instruisto sidas?_ – Which teacher is sitting?

# The Suffix *-ist*

is used to form th ename of a person regularly engaged in some activity, e.g.

- _instru**ist**o_ – teacher
- _hotel**ist**o_ – hotelier, hotel-keeper
- _esperant**ist**o_ – Esperantist, adherent of Esperanto

# The Suffix *-in*

is used to form the feminine of a noun:

- *patro* – father
  - _patr**in**o_ – mother
- *lernanto* – pupil
  - _lernant**in**o_ – pupil (female)
- *instruisto* – teacher
  - _instruist**in**o_ – (woman) teacher

# Affirmative Particle

_**jes**_ has the same sound and meaning as the English "yes".

- *Ĉu vi estas en la ĉambro?*
  - _**Jes**, mi estas en la ĉambro._

# Negative Particle

_**ne**_ corresponds to "no" (opposite of "yes") and to "not":

- _**Ne**, mi **ne** estas en la ĉambro._
