# Adjectives

The adjectival ending is _**-a**_, e.g.

- _bel**a**_ – beautiful
- _grand**a** frato_ – big brother
- _malgrand**a** fratino_ – little sister

# Cases

Esperanto nouns have two cases, nominative and accusative. The accusative is used to show the object of a transitive verb (the person or thing affected by the action of the verb).

- _Kiu**n** mi vidas?_ – Who**m** do I see?
- _Mi vidas amiko**n**_ – I see a friend.

Do not use the accusative after the verb "to be" or its equivalents.

Adjectives agree with the nouns they qualify: they take the same _**-j**_ and _**-n**_ endings.

- _Vi estas bon**a** amik**o**_ – You're a good friend.
- _Vi estas bon**aj** amik**oj**_ – You're good friends.
- _Vi havas bon**an** amik**on**_ – You have a good friend.
- _Vi havas bon**ajn** amik**ojn**_ – You have good friends.

Esperanto expresses other case relationships through the use of prepositions. The English possesive is rendered by _**de**_:

- _La libroj **de** mia frato._ – My brother's books.

# Conjugation

## Base form: *-i*

- _labor**i**_ – to work

## Present tense: *-as*

- _mi labor**as**_ – I work
- _vi labor**as**_ – You work
- _li/ŝi labor**as**_ – He/she works
- _ni labor**as**_ – We work
- _ili labor**as**_ – They work

## Past tense: *-is*

- _mi labor**is**_ – I worked.
- _vi labor**is**_ – You worked.
- _li/ŝi labor**is**_ – He/she worked.
- _ni labor**is**_ – We worked.
- _ili labor**is**_ – They worked.

## Future tense: *-os*

- _mi labor**os**_ – I will work.
- _vi labor**os**_ – You will work.
- _li/ŝi labor**os**_ – He/she will work.
- _ni labor**os**_ – We will work.
- _ili labor**os**_ – They will work.

# The conjuction *ke*

is used to introduce a noun clause. Unlike its English equivalent "that"

1. it cannot be omitted, and
2. it is usually preceded by a comma.

Examples:

- _Vi vidas **ke** mi manĝas._ – You see that I'm eating.
- _Li diras **ke** li iros._ – He says he'll go.

# The prefix *mal-*

changes the meaning of a word to its opposite.

- *bona* – good
  - _**mal**bona_ – bad
- *granda* – big, great
  - _**mal**granda_ – little, small
- *bela* – beautiful
  - _**mal**bela_ – ugly

# The prefix *ge-*

denotes both sexes together:

- _**ge**fratoj_ – brothers and sisters
- _**ge**patroj_ – parents

# Polite expressions

- _**bonvolu**_ – please, be so good as to
- _**dankon**_ – thank you
- _**saluton**_ – hello, hi

# Word order

The usual order of words in the sentence is subject-verb-object, as in English. However, since the accusative ending *-n* pn the object makes it clear which is the subject and which the object, word order can be varied for stylistic or pragmatic purposes, very much more readily in Esperanto than in English.

- *Mi legas libron.* – I'm reading a book.
- *Libron mi legas.* – (A book is what I'm reading.)

# *Kio, Kion*

*Kio* means "what", as subject of the sentence:

- _**Kio** estas tio?_ – What's that?
- _**Kio** estas sur la tablo?_ – What is on the table?

Where "what" is the object of the verb, the Esperanto equivalent is *Kion*:

- _**Kion** vi faras?_ – What are you doing?
- _**Kion** ŝi diris?_ – What did she say?
