# Adverbs

Adverbs may be formed by adding the ending *-e*.

- _bel**e**_ – beautifully
- _fort**e**_ – strongly
- _rapid**a** aŭto_ – a fast car
  - _veturi rapid**e**_ – to travel fast

# The prepositions *per* and *kun*

## *Per* - with (by means of, making use of)

- _Manĝi **per** kulero_ – To eat with a spoon
- _Ŝi kantis **per** tre bela voĉo._ – She sang with (in) a very beautiful voice.

## *Kun* - with (together with)

- _Mi iris **kun** la amiko._ – I went with a friend.
- _Mi parolos **kun** li._ – I will talk to him.

# The Preposition *post*

*post* – after (referring to time)

- _Li venis **post** mi._ – He came after me (after I did).
- _**post** du horoj_ – in two hours' time
- _Li venos **post** tri horoj._ – He will come in three hours.
- *poste* – afterwards, later on

# The Preposition *Malantaŭ*

*malantaŭ* - behind

- _Li venis **malantaŭ** mi._ – He came behind me (walking / driving along behind).

Be careful to stress this word correctly: _mal**an**taŭ_.

# The suffix *-ul*

Person characterized by some quality:

- _grand**ul**o_ – a large person
- _malbon**ul**o_ – a bad person
- _bel**ul**ino_ – a beautiful woman, a beauty

# The suffix *-ej*

forms the word for a place where something regularly happens:

- _lern**ej**o_ – school (place for learning)
- _kuir**ej**o_ – kitchen (place for cooking: *kuiri* – to cook)
- _labor**ej**o_ – workplace

# The suffix *-ebl*

denotes possibility, and corresponds to English "-able", "-ible":

- _manĝ**ebl**a_ – edible
- _vid**ebl**a_ – visible
- _kompren**ebl**e_ – understandably (naturally, of course)
- _**ebl**e_ – perhaps, maybe
- _mal**ebl**a_ – impossible

# The Imperative

The verb ending for a command is *-u*.

- _Manĝ**u**!_ – Eat! Eat up!
- _Ir**u**!_ – Go! Go on!

This form can also be expressed with a subject:

- _Li lern**u**!_ – Let him learn!
- _Ni vid**u**._ – Let's see.
