# Numerals

The numerals are listed in the appendix. Higher numbers are formed by combining elementary numerals as follows:

- 1 238 – *mil du-cent tri-dek ok*
- 153 837 – *cent kvin-dek tri mil ok-cent tri-dek sep*
- Addition: 8 + 3 = 11 – *ok plus tri estas dek-unu*
- Subtraction: 15 - 6 = 9 – *dek-kvin minus ses estas naŭ*

# Accusative of Motion Towards

Esperanto prepositions are normally followed by the nominative case:

- *post mi* – after me
- *sen ŝi* – without her
- *en domo* – in a house

However, prepositions describing place may be followed by an accusative to show motion toward, e.g.

- _Mi iras en la domo**n**._ – I am going into the house.
- (Compare: *Ili manĝas en la domo.* – They are eating in the house.)

Another example:

- _La kato saltis sur la tablo**n**._ – The cat jumped onto the table.
- *La kato saltis sur la tablo.* – The cat jumped around on the table.

# The pronoun *oni*

The indefinite pronoun *oni* means

- people (in general
- they
- you.

Examples:

- _**Oni** manĝas._ – People are eating.
- _**Oni** sidas._ – People are sitting.

# Th reflexive pronoun *si*

The pronoun *si* (accusative \*sin) refers back to the subject of the clause:

- himself
- herself
- itself
- themselves
- oneself

Examples:

- _Li lavas **sin**._ – He washes himself.
- _Ŝi rigardas **sin**._ – She looks at herself.
- _Ili kantas al **si**._ – They are singing to themselves.

*si* is used only in referring to a third-person subject. It is never itself the subject of a sentence. Compare:

- *Mi rigardas min.* – I look at myself.
- *Ili rigardas sin.* – They look at themselves.

# The prefix *re-*

Like English "re-", it can mean either

- "again, a second time"
- or "back".

Examples:

- _**re**vidi_ – to see again
- _**re**doni_ – to give back
- _**re**meti_ – to put back, to replace
